# IA-32 and AMD64/Intel 64

The colloquially named "x86" family of instruction set architectures includes
Intel's 32-bit **IA-32** architecture and AMD's 64-bit **AMD64** architecture,
subsequently adopted by Intel as **Intel 64**.

The name "x86" is short for "80x86", and derives from the part numbers of early
Intel chips, which all ended in "86", _e.g._, 8086, 80186, 80286, 80386, and
80486\. The trend might have continued with the 80586, had courts not ruled
that numbers cannot be trademarked. Thus was born the Pentium.


## Operating modes

IA-32 processors operate in one of four modes at any time:

* **Real Mode**, with a 16-bit segmented memory model
* **Protected Mode**, which introduces memory protection and privilege levels
* **Virtual 86 Mode**, which allows processors to run legacy real-mode software
* **System Management Mode**, which is the bane of real-time software developers

AMD64 processors provide an additional operating mode, with two sub-modes:

* **Long Mode**, which Intel calls IA-32e ("e" for "extensions")
    * **64-bit Mode**, with a flat 64-bit memory model
    * **Compatibility Mode**, which allows 64-bit processors to run legacy
      32-bit software

Over the years, Intel has learned the hard way that backwards compatibility
sells chips. For that reason, all IA-32 and AMD64 processors boot in 16-bit
real mode. Out of the box, the most advanced Intel Xeon Platinum is no more
capable than an 8086 from the 1970s. System software is responsible for
switching to long mode to unlock the advanced features of the chip.


### Real mode

How could the 8086 microprocessor, with its 16-bit registers and data bus,
address 20 bits (1 MiB) of memory? By adding _two_ 16-bit registers — a segment
register and an offset register — with the segment register shifted four bits
to the left (equivalent to multiplying by 16). For example, the logical address
`1234:1234h` corresponds to the physical address `13574h`:

               Segment register
      ┌───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┐
      │   1   │   2   │   3   │   4   ┊   0   │ << 4 (shifted left four bits)
      └───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┘
       15                            0
  
                       Offset register
              ┌───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┐
    +         │   1   │   2   │   3   │   4   │
              └───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┘
               15                            0
  
      =========================================
  
                   Physical Address
      ┌───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┬───────┐
      │   1   │   3   │   5   │   7   │   4   │
      └───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┴───────┘
       19                                    0

It's a clever trick, but has two quirks:

1. While any given segment and offset uniquely define exactly one physical
   address, the converse is not true; any given physical address can be
   constructed from several combinations of segments and offsets.

   For example, the following segment:offset pairs produce equivalent physical
   addresses:

         F000          FF00          FFF0          FFFF 
       +  FFFF       +  0FFF       +  00FF       +  000F
         =====         =====         =====         =====
         FFFFF    ≡    FFFFF    ≡    FFFFF    ≡    FFFFF

2. It is possible to overflow the 20-bit physical address, in which case the
   address wraps:

         FFFF
       +  FFFF
         =====
         0FFEF (NOT 10FFEF)

   Some software written for the 8086/8088 depended on this wrap-around. When
   the 80286 shipped in 1982 with a 24-bit address bus, system designers opted
   to disable its 20th address pin ("A20") for backwards compatibility with the
   previous processors. System software had to enable the A20 line in order to
   address more than 1 MiB of memory.

Real-address mode defines four segment registers, each with a specific purpose:

  * `cs`: code segment
  * `ss`: stack segment
  * `ds`: data segment
  * `es`: extra segment


### Protected mode

The 16-bit segment registers are repurposed to hold a segment selector, which
points to a segment descriptor in a segment descriptor table:

        Segment Selector
               in
      Segmentation Register
    ┌────────────┬────┬─────┐          Global/Local
    │ index      │ TI │ RPL │        Descriptor Table
    └────────────┴────┴─────┘     ┌────────────────────┐
     15    │    3   2  1   0      │         ...        │
           │                      ├────────────────────┤
           └─────────────────────>│ Segment Descriptor │
                                  ├────────────────────┤
                                  │         ...        │
                                  └────────────────────┘
                                             ▲
                                             │
                                             └─────── gdtr/ldtr

The segment selector's Table Indicator (TI) bit determines whether the selector
points to the GDT (TI = 0) or LDT (TI = 1).

The segment selector's Requestor Privilege Level (RPL) records the CPU's Current
Privilege Level (CPL) when the selector is loaded into a segment register.

The "null selector" — index = 0, TI = 0 — is used to represent unused segments.
Memory accesses to a null segment raise #GP.  For this reason, the first entry
in the GDT cannot be used. Additionally, `cs` and `ss` can't be null — loading
either with the null selector also raises #GP.

Segment descriptors are 8-byte structures describing the base, size, type, and
other attributes of a memory segment:

     63          56  55     51           48     43  40 39          32
    ┌──────────────┬───┬───┬───────────────┬───┬──────┬──────────────┐
    │ base (24-31) │ G │ … │ limit (16-19) │ … │ type │ base (16-23) │
    ├──────────────┴───┴───┴───────────┬───┴───┴──────┴──────────────┤
    │            base (0-15)           │         limit (0-15)        │
    └──────────────────────────────────┴─────────────────────────────┘
     31                                                             0

The 32-bit base can address 4 GiB. The 20-bit limit (size) supports up to 1 MiB
segments with byte-sized granularity (G = 0) or up to 4 GiB segments with 4 KiB
page-sized granularity (G = 1).

Protected mode supports a form of hardware-assisted multitasking by saving task
state in a task state segment (TSS). However, most operating systems don't use
hardware multitasking, opting instead to manage task switches in software.


### Virtual 86 mode

Allows protected mode operating systems to run legacy 16-bit real mode software.


### System Management mode

Allows handling of high-priority non-maskable hardware interrupts for things
like thermal control and battery charging. Invisible to operating systems,
except as missing cycles.


### Long mode

AMD64 calls it long mode; Intel 64 calls it IA-32e.

#### 64-bit mode

The full capabilities of 64-bit processors are only available when running in
64-bit mode, which includes:

  * 64-bit virtual addresses in a flat memory model
  * 64-bit general purpose registers, and 8 more of them (`r8` - `r15`)
  * RIP-relative addressing mode

As a sub-mode of long mode, 64-bit mode can be enabled on a per-code-segment
basis. That is, in fact, one of the only uses of segmentation in 64-bit mode.
Another legacy IA-32 feature not supported in long mode is hardware task
switching via the task state segment (TSS).

By default, addresses are 64-bits long and operands are 32-bits long (though
both can be overridden with instruction prefixes), yielding an LP64 data model:
`long`s and pointers are 64-bits, while `int`s remain 32-bit. That results in
smaller binaries and less wasted RAM than if `int`s were 64-bit.

#### Compatibility mode

Compatibility being key to the success of AMD64, this 64-bit sub-mode, which is
enabled on a per-code-segment basis, allows legacy 16- and 32-bit protected 
mode software to run on 64-bit systems, concurrently with 64-bit applications.


## Paging

When paging is enabled, the processor views main memory as an array of 4 KiB
page frames and carves the virtual address space into 4 KiB pages that can be
loaded into any page frame, or none at all (paged out to a swap area, for
example).


### 32-bit

The 32-bit linear address produced by the segmentation unit is mapped to a
32-bit physical address by the memory management unit (MMU) using a two-level
page table tree:
     
                 32-bit Linear Virtual Address
    ┌─────────────────┬────────────────┬─────────────────────┐
    │    Directory    │      Table     │        Offset       │
    └─────────────────┴────────────────┴─────────────────────┘
     31      │      22 21      │     12 11              │    0
             │                 │                        │
             │                 │                        │
             │                 │    Page                │
             │                 │    Table               │
             │                 │  ┌───────┐             │
             │                 │  │  ...  │             │
             │    Page         │  │  ...  │             │
             │  Directory      │  ├───────┤             │
             │  ┌───────┐      └─>│  pte  │─────────┐   │
             │  │  ...  │         ├───────┤         ▼   ▼
             │  │  ...  │         │  ...  │     0xAAAAABBB
             │  ├───────┤         │  ...  │   32-bit Physical
             └─>│  pte  │────────>└───────┘      Address
                ├───────┤          4 KiB
                │  ...  │
                │  ...  │
       cr3 ────>└───────┘
                  4 KiB


### 32-bit with physical address extensions (PAE)

The 32-bit linear address produced by the segmentation unit is mapped to a
36-bit physical address by the memory management unit (MMU) using a three-level
page table tree.


### 64-bit

The 64-bit linear address is mapped to a 64-bit physical address by the MMU
using a four-level page table tree.


## Memory addressing

IA-32 addresses objects in memory by constructing effective addresses, relative
to some segment, using a combination of base, index, scale, and displacement:

* a base register (_e.g._, `bp`, `bx`), used by high-level languages to store
  the base address of data structures
* an index register, representing a (possibly negative) array index
* a scale factor (1, 2, 4, or 8), representing the size of array elements
* a displacement, encoded in the instruction, representing the offset of a
  field within an aggregate type (like a C `struct`).

Logical addresses are composed of a segment selector and an effective address,
or offset within the segment. Logical addresses are resolved to "linear", or
virtual, addresses by the segmentation unit, and finally to physical addresses
that can be driven onto the address bus by the paging unit, as depicted below:

              Base + [Scale x Index] + Displacement
                       ┌───────────────────┐
                       │ Effective Address │
                       └───────────────────┘
                                 │
                                 │
                                 │
                Logical Address  ▼
    ┌──────────────────┬───────────────────┐
    │ Segment Selector │      Offset       │
    └──────────────────┴───────────────────┘
                       │
                       │  Segmentation unit
                       │
                       ▼
    ┌──────────────────────────────────────┐
    │        Linear virtual address        │
    └──────────────────────────────────────┘
                       │
                       │  Paging unit
                       │
                       ▼
    ┌──────────────────────────────────────┐
    │           Physical Address           │
    └──────────────────────────────────────┘
                       │
                       │  Bus unit
                       │
                       ▼
                  Address Bus
                       

## Notable Processors

### 8086 (1978)

* 16-bit data registers (AX, BX, CX, DX)
* 16-bit address registers (SP, BP, SI, DI)
* 16-bit segment registers (CS, DS, ES, SS)
* 16-bit external data bus
* 20-bit external address bus (1 MiB addressability)

### 8088 (1979)

An 8086 with an 8-bit external data bus. The processor in IBM's PC-XT.

### 80188 (1980)

Reduced chip count versions of the 8088.

### 80186 (1982)

Reduced chip count versions of the 8086.

### 80286 (1982)

* 24-bit external address bus (16 MiB)
* Protected mode with four privilege levels

### 80386 (1985)

* 32-bit registers
* 32-bit external data bus
* 32-bit external address bus (4 GiB)
* Segmented and flat memory models
* 4-KiB paged virtual memory

### 80486 (1989)

* 5-stage pipeline
* 8-KiB cache
* Optional integrated x87 math co-processor (FPU)

### Pentium (1993)

* 64-bit external data bus
* Some models with 64-bit MMX registers
* Superscalar (two pipelines = two instructions per clock)
* 8-KiB instruction + data caches
* Branch prediction unit
* APIC

### AMD64 (2003)

* 64-bit general purpose registers

### Later models

After the Pentium, the Intel processor family tree gets a bit confusing,
with myriad marketing names (Pentium Pro, Pentium II, Pentium III, Pentium 4, 
Pentium M, Pentium D, and Pentium Extreme Edition, to name a few) that sound
like minor variations on a theme, but in fact represent radically new designs
based on a bevy of microarchitectures:

* P6 Family
* NetBurst
* Pentium M
* Core
* Enhanced Core
* Atom
* Nehalem
* Westmere
* Sandy Bridge
* Ivy Bridge
* Ivy Bridge-E
* Haswell
* Haswell-E
* Airmont
* Silvermont
* Broadwell
* Skylake
* Kaby Lake
* Goldmont
* Knights Landing
* Goldmont Plus
* Coffee Lake
* Kinghts Mill
* Cascade Lake
* Ice Lake

See [WikiChip's Intel Microarchitectures][] page for the gory details.


## Reading

* [Intel Microprocessors 8008 to 8086 and beyond][]
* [Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer Manuals][]
* [WikiChip's Intel Microarchitectures][]

[Intel Microprocessors 8008 to 8086 and beyond]: https://stevemorse.org/8086history/8086_evolution.pdf
[Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer Manuals]: https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-sdm
[WikiChip's Intel Microarchitectures]: https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/intel/microarchitectures
